---
title: Fantasy Monday
type: blog
description: Writeup of Fantasy Monday
rss: true
date: "2021-03-30"
---

# Fantasy Monday
Fantasy Monday is my free, Monday only subset of [Fantasy
Math](https://fantasymath.com). It lets you put in you, your opponents score,
and get back the probability you win (with some nice distribution plots).

It's pretty popular, especially during the first week of the season when there
are two Monday night games and everyone's excited about the season. I've
written before about [Fantasy Math](/fantasymath) and how I'm not positive it
has product-market fit, but Fantasy Monday definitely does. Unfortunately, the
price is free.

## History
This was actually one of the earliest applications of the model. Way back with
[Bayesian Fantasy Football](/bayesian-fantasy-football), I used to run the
matchups for my league every Monday and report back on the league messageboard.
The rest of my league has an ambivalent attitiude about my model, but they
liked these Monday night updates, and would ask for the probabilities if I
hadn't gotten around to posting them.

(While [innovative](bayesian-fantasy-football), the Bayesian model had issues,
especially towards the tails. I still remember the night a guy in my league won
even though the model predicted he had like a 1/100,000 chance to do so â€” a
true Monday Night Miracle!)

Now, of course, my league can check out their probabilities every monday like
everyone else at [https://fantasymonday.com](https://fantasymonday.com).

## Fantasy Tuesday
During 2020, when a few games got moved to Tuesday due to Covid, I put up a
Tuesday night version at
[https://tuesdaynightmiracle.com](https://tuesdaynightmiracle.com). This was
more of a marketing gimmick than anything else, but got enough signups to pay
for the domain name.
