---
title: Python vs R
type: blog
description: Writeup of Learn to Code with Fantasy Football
rss: true
published: "2020-08-01"
---

# Python vs R

One thing a lot of beginning programmers stress about is deciding which
programming language to learn.  Today the big choice in working with data comes
to Python or R

## Comparision
[My](https://fantasycoding.com) [Books](https://codebaseball.com) teach you
Python, along with libraries Pandas (manipulating data), BeautifulSoup (for
scraping), seaborn (data visualization), and statsmodels and scikit learn
(modeling and machine learning).

R is a statistical programming language and an alternative to Python. You can
basically think of it as Pandas + a few other statistical libraries. It's a
fine option. I started out in R, and am still moderately fluent. It's been
around longer and has a solid MLB/football analytics following. Like Python,
it's open source (e.g. free).

When it comes to data analysis, Python and R are a lot alike. Python probably
has the edge in machine learning with scikit-learn, and Pandas is excellent
(and getting even better all the time). R has the tidyverse, which a lot of
people like.

For non-data applications Python is definitely better. People use Python to
build their own APIs and websites, run their own servers, control their
computers, robots, whatever.

That's probably why until about 5 years ago the R/Python split was about 50/50,
but since then Python is the much more popular option (search for "R vs Python
market share").

## Programmers are more likely to move from R -> Python than the other way around.

Also interesting is this [study of programmer migration patterns by programmer
blogger apenwarr](https://apenwarr.ca/log/20190318). He found that R users are much more likely to jump to
learning Python next than the other way around.

![Migration](/images/migration.jpg)

As apenwarr explains, nodes in red below are "currently the most common
'terminal nodes' â€” where people stop because they can't find anything better".

Python 3 (which what we learn in LTCWFF) is a terminal node. R users (and
Matlab, Fortran, etc) tend to migrate to it over time.

So if you're going to end up moving from R -> Python anyway (or, in my case SAS
-> Stata -> R -> Python), it might make sense to save time and start directly
with Python?  If this sounds intriguing definitely check out the books:

[https://fantasycoding.com](https://fantasycoding.com)

[https://codebaseball.com](https://codebaseball.com)
